Hey there what's going on.
Welcome to another session of limitless calculus.
Today we're going to cover continuity so in business calculus there's this concept called continuity.
What does this sound to you.
Write it down so you have it in mind.
By the way if I sound a little different it's because I'm sick.
So just bear with me.
I should be OK for the next tutorial.
So it's
Kaante nudity.
So what do you think that is.
What does that sound like.
Well to me it sounds like something that has no interruptions.
Right.
It just keeps on going.
You can think about your favorite series from 10 years ago.
Do you remember when after an episode ended on a cliffhanger and you just wanted to see more but it
was over.
And then he would say to be continued.
Well to be continued means that you'll have more of the series later on.
But that means the series is not stopping it's still going.
So continuity has to mean that something is not interrupted.
Right.
It just keeps going on and on and on.
On that same token functions can be continuous or discontinuous.
And let's go into an informal definition of what continuity is.
All right so here we have the definition of continuity.
Now this is a very informal definition.
It's mostly use when you have a graph and you want to check if it's continuous or not.
It says a function is continuous if Fed can be drawn without lifting your pencil.
Again a function is continuous if it can be drawn without lifting your pencil.
What the heck does that mean.
So remember that if we have our piecewise function you know something like this like we've done in the
past let's say we have a function here.
And then this one jumps to this function here.
And then that one jumps over to this function over here.
Etc..
All right so this from keeps going and keeps going down and let's do a couple of jumps.
So you have this one here is defined down here.
And you have this one here defined down there and open circle over here.
All right so you should have seen this before.
Because we covered it in a different section.
This is a piecewise function.
And basically it's a function composed of different functions for different inputs.
So from here to the left we have the pink function then from here to here we have the blue function
and from here to the right we have the green function.
So let me ask you a question.
Can you draw this function without lifting your pencil.
Well let's see.
So you start drawing from the left you come here you draw your circle.
Put what happens.
You need to go down.
You need to go down here.
Can you do that without lifting your pencil.
No you kids you actually have to lift your pencil and then you have to come down here.
After that you draw a circle over here.
Then what happens again.
Well you have to lift your pencil to keep drawing.
So you left your pencil.
You move it up here and then you keep on drawing.
But see we had to lift our pencils twice in order to draw this piecewise function.
This whole thing of three functions for that reason this function is nuts.
Continues
All right.
Because we had to lift our pencil to draw it.
It is not continuous.
What is another example.
See
what about a nice little parable over here.
Something like this.
All right so do we need to lift our pencils to draw those.
So let's see you start here and then you go and ANS you go to here.
Nope we didn't have to lift her pencil.
That's because there are no jumps like we have here.
Here we jump for example from this point to this point.
And at that point we need to lift our pencil case we did not need to do that.
It's always a curve.
So you can just draw the curve continuously.
All right.
For that reason this function is continuous
right.
So we can actually call this the pencil test if you want.
So we can actually refer to it
right to the pencil test as a function is continuous.
If it can be drawn without lifting your pencil.
So if you get a graph and you want to check if it's continuous You just have to check if you can draw
it without lifting your pencil if you can.
It is continuous.
If you cannot it is not continues and it didn't pass the pencil test.
Now something to note here is where checking for continuity everywhere.
All right.
So we're checking if this function is continuous everywhere.
That means for all x values the answer is No.
And for this one we're also checking if it's continuous everywhere.
The answer is yes because you can draw it at any point without lifting your pencil.
However there's a concept of continuity at a certain point.
All right.
So for example from here to here guess what the function is continuous because in these points you do
not have to lift your pencil to draw them.
So to draw from this part of the line to this part of the line it's OK.
The same thing for example from here to here it is continues right there because you do not have to
lift your pencil to draw this segment of a line.
So now we'll look at a continuity at a specific point instead of doing continuous everywhere.
All right but again just to recap this function as a whole is not continuous everywhere and this function
as a whole is continuous everywhere and that's it.
So let's go into a more formal definition of continuity.
OK so we just covered continuity in a very informal way.
You're just given a graph and you kind of have to see oh what I have to lift my pencil for me to draw
this or not and that's how you determine if the graph is continuous everywhere.
But now let's go into a more formal definition.
So what if you're asked if a graph is continuous at a point where X equals a.
How do we determine that.
So there are three conditions for continuity.
So we have three conditions that need to be true.
So that the function is continuous right for continuity.
And let's assume we're talking about a point where X equals a.
So your input is a whatever that is or condition number one is is that f of a is defined.
What does the fine mean.
What does it mean that f is defined.
Well remember how we talked about domain and about how some values are allowable to input and some others
are not.
That's what this means.
If FOIAs find to it means that when you plug in a you do not get division over zero or you did not get
a negative number on there and even Rood's etc..
So basically you have to make sure that a is part of the domain.
If you plug in a and you get a number back you're good to go because it means that a is part of the
domain.
All right so again first thing f of a needs to be defined.
Number two is that the limit of the function f of x and this f of x is whatever function you're working
with.
As x approaches a
exists
OK.
So something very important.
Check it out.
We have for condition one that f of a is defined and for a condition to the limit of f of x.
X approaches a exists.
Notice this a from point one was the same a as from point 2.
So whatever the X is approaching or number two is the same thing that you need to plug in.
Number 1 whatever that a is whatever that number is.
All right.
And remember we talked about limits.
When does a limit exist when the limit from the lat equals the limit from the right.
So for this to be true the limit from left
equals the limit from right
so I've ever raised it fine but the limit from the left is different than the one from the right than
the limit of f of x x approaches.
A does not exist and therefore the function is not continuous.
Right.
So the third point is pretty cool.
Third point says that number one needs to be equal to number two.
So f of a has to be the same as the limit of f of x
x approaches a.
Interesting.
So not only does it need to be defined for a and not only does the limit of f of x as x approaches a
must exist they have to be equal to each other.
If one of these three conditions is not true then the function is not continuous at that point where
X equals a.
And of course this might seem very complicated it will do a very cool mnemonic so you can actually remember
this very easily.
All right so here we have it our mnemonic is d equals L and I like to think about that as driver's license.
So what is this.
Well first of all the abbreviation of driver's license is DL.
That's where the d l comes from.
Now what does a D equals l mean.
So for a function to be continuous at a point three things need to happen.
So first of all the function needs to be defined at f of a.
Then the limit as x approaches a must exist that C L for limits and the definition must equal the limit.
Right so you have all those three rules in this simple statement that equals L.
So let me write this for you.
So the first thing that needs to happen is the function is defined
at f of a.
So when you plug in a into the function it gives you back a number because it's part of the domain then.
Point number two is the limit of f of x as x approaches A
exists.
Remember this means that the limit from the right is equal to the limit from the left.
And finally for the equal sign
right f of a
is equal to limit of f of x
x approaches a.
So if you plug in a into this function that's the same as finding the limit of the function as x approaches
a.
These two are equal.
All right so hopefully it's easier for you to remember.
I like to think of it the following way.
So a driver's license when you get it you don't have to get it every day.
You don't have to go to the DMV every single day to get your license right.
It's valid for a continuous period of time.
So that's how you make the connection.
Driver's license it's continuous.
And for that reason you can just say driver's license.
The abbreviation is d equals L.
And then from D L you get your three rules.
Number one the function is defined at f ave then number two the limit of f of x x approaches a exists
and then you're a third point which is that the D definition is equal to l the limit.
Let's go over a quick example and let's find out if a function is continuous at different points.